[FC-0118] docs: add ADR for standardizing authentication patterns (#38301)
openedx/edx-platform: docs/decisions/0034-unify-auth-oauth2-dot-v2.rst

Standardize Authentication Patterns and Security Schemes
========================================================

:Status: Proposed
:Date: 2026-04-07
:Deciders: Open edX Platform / API Working Group
:Technical Story: Open edX REST API Standards - Consistent authentication patterns and security scheme usage

Context
=======

Open edX APIs have inconsistent authentication patterns and security scheme implementations:

* Some APIs use OAuth2, others use JWT, some use session authentication
* Multiple authentication mechanisms are enabled globally but not consistently applied
* Security scheme declarations don't match actual authentication behavior
* External integrators cannot reliably predict which authentication method to use
* Internal APIs mix authentication mechanisms without clear patterns

This inconsistency creates confusion for:
- External developers determining which auth method to implement
- Internal teams maintaining consistent authentication patterns
- Security reviews and compliance assessments
- Automated tools expecting predictable authentication

Decision
========

> 1. **OAuth2 via Django OAuth Toolkit (DOT) MUST be the standard authentication

Reviewer: How is this different from JWT authentication?  My understanding was that JWTs were what the OAUTH2 mechanism produced for use in the authorization header?

Author: You are right! I think the wording needs to be changed a bit because showing Oauth2 & JWT as separate can cause confusion. In the codebase, we have two JWT issuance paths:

- `create_jwt_token_dict()`: wraps a DOT OAuth2 access token into a JWT (DB-backed, revocable, for external clients)
- `create_jwt_for_user()`: issues a JWT directly with no OAuth2 flow and no DB row (non-revocable, for internal service calls), it is used for internal service-to-service communication.
Both are validated by the same `JwtAuthentication` class.

The real distinction is between JwtAuthentication (supported) and BearerAuthentication (deprecated per [OEP-0042](https://docs.openedx.org/projects/openedx-proposals/en/latest/best-practices/oep-0042-bp-authentication.html#api-providers-authentication-classes)) and the use of multiple authentication methods in single API endpoint. I am updating the ADR to reflect this and we will no longer treat "OAuth2" and "JWT" as separate mechanisms.

* Security scheme declarations don't match actual authentication behavior
* External integrators cannot reliably predict which authentication method to use
* Internal APIs mix authentication mechanisms without clear patterns

This inconsistency creates confusion for:
- External developers determining which auth method to implement
- Internal teams maintaining consistent authentication patterns
- Security reviews and compliance assessments
- Automated tools expecting predictable authentication

The codebase has two JWT issuance paths, both validated by ``JwtAuthentication``:

* ``create_jwt_token_dict()`` — wraps a DOT OAuth2 access token into a JWT (DB-backed, revocable, for external clients)
* ``create_jwt_for_user()`` — issues a JWT directly with no OAuth2 flow and no DB row (non-revocable, for internal service communication)

Decision
========

1. **JWT authentication via** ``JwtAuthentication`` **MUST be the standard
   authentication mechanism for all API access** (external and internal), per `OEP-0042`_
2. **``BearerAuthentication`` and ``BearerAuthenticationAllowInactiveUser`` are
   deprecated and MUST NOT be used in new code**

> 3. **Session authentication MUST be used only for browser-based UI interactions**

Reviewer: I'm not sure if this distinction is super important.  What is the bad thing that happens if your API endpoints support session auth also?  Right now DRF in openedx-platform supports both by default: https://github.com/openedx/openedx-platform/blob/master/openedx/envs/common.py#L822-L825 and I don't see a problem with that.  I think it's more valuable that all endpoints support any valid auth scheme than having API calls not support the browser.

Author: @feanil I think you have valid point here that we should support any valid auth scheme instead of categorizing them on the basis of their usage. 
I am adding a new commit that addresses above point with some additional remains(includes removal of JWT issuers & use of asymmetric keys) of OEP-0042, But it had some consequences([Link](https://docs.openedx.org/projects/openedx-proposals/en/latest/best-practices/oep-0042-bp-authentication.html#consequences)) that you might want to look in. That way we can decide the scope of this ADR. And we can remove the part that is not needed for this ADR accordingly.

Reviewer: I think this line is still worth updating to say that both JWT and Session auth are okay but other deprectaed authentication schemes such as bearer are not. What do you think.  That way this aligns with the cleanup we want to do.

  handles old Bearer tokens and must not be confused with this.
* Security scheme declarations don't match actual authentication behavior
* External integrators cannot reliably predict which authentication method to use
* Internal APIs mix authentication mechanisms without clear patterns

This inconsistency creates confusion for:
- External developers determining which auth method to implement
- Internal teams maintaining consistent authentication patterns
- Security reviews and compliance assessments
- Automated tools expecting predictable authentication

The codebase has two JWT issuance paths, both validated by ``JwtAuthentication``:

* ``create_jwt_token_dict()`` — wraps a DOT OAuth2 access token into a JWT (DB-backed, revocable, for external clients)
* ``create_jwt_for_user()`` — issues a JWT directly with no OAuth2 flow and no DB row (non-revocable, for internal service communication)

Decision
========

1. **JWT authentication via** ``JwtAuthentication`` **MUST be the standard
   authentication mechanism for all API access** (external and internal), per `OEP-0042`_
2. **Session authentication MAY be supported alongside** ``JwtAuthentication``

>    on any endpoint — this is the platform default and has no security implications

Reviewer 2: i think saying there are zero implications is inaccurate. maybe soften it to something like "this is the platform default and is acceptable for most endpoints", since session auth carries CSRF concerns, cookie-handling rules, and a different threat model from JWT

Author: let me change the wording a bit.

   from rest_framework.permissions import IsAuthenticated

   class ExternalCourseViewSet(viewsets.ViewSet):
       """External API — OAuth2 JWT authentication. Send as: Authorization: JWT <token>"""
       authentication_classes = [JwtAuthentication]
       permission_classes = [IsAuthenticated]

* **Internal Service API (JWT issued via** ``create_jwt_for_user()`` **):**

.. code-block:: python

   from rest_framework import viewsets
   from edx_rest_framework_extensions.auth.jwt.authentication import JwtAuthentication
   from rest_framework.permissions import IsAuthenticated

   class InternalServiceViewSet(viewsets.ViewSet):
       """Internal service-to-service API — same JwtAuthentication, different token issuance."""
       authentication_classes = [JwtAuthentication]
       permission_classes = [IsAuthenticated]

* **Browser-based API (Session only):**

.. code-block:: python

   from rest_framework import viewsets
   from openedx.core.lib.api.authentication import SessionAuthenticationAllowInactiveUser
   from rest_framework.permissions import IsAuthenticated

   class BrowserUIViewSet(viewsets.ViewSet):
       """Browser UI API - Session authentication only."""

>        authentication_classes = [SessionAuthenticationAllowInactiveUser]

Reviewer 2: I think the Browser-based API example contradicts Decision #1 here. Decision #1 says JwtAuthentication MUST be used for all API access, but this example only has SessionAuthenticationAllowInactiveUser. Should we either add JwtAuthentication alongside session here

Author: I think we can miss it, decision no.1 says, ``JwtAuthentication`` MUST be the standard authentication mechanism for all API access i.e. for **external and internal** API types. May be I can change decision no.1 to `all API(external and internal) access` to resolve the confusion.

For browser based APIs, session authentication is kind of must with an option of JWTAuthentication to support any valid auth scheme.

Reviewer 3: @feanil: Can you point to an example in edx-platform? I'm not clear on what this is, and thus not clear on the recommendation.

Author: @robrap can u please take a look at it again? I have changed the examples according to our decisions & also adjusted missing items from https://github.com/openedx/edx-drf-extensions/issues/284.

Reviewer: I agree with @Abdul-Muqadim-Arbisoft , I think we should always allow JWT auth for any endpoints even browser ones.  As the openedx-platform moves towards becoming more of an API, it's nice to assume that you can hit all endpoints with JWTs but that some may also support session auth to support iframing in or other browser based rendering.

  handles old Bearer tokens and must not be confused with this.
* Security scheme declarations don't match actual authentication behavior
* External integrators cannot reliably predict which authentication method to use
* Internal APIs mix authentication mechanisms without clear patterns

This inconsistency creates confusion for:
- External developers determining which auth method to implement
- Internal teams maintaining consistent authentication patterns
- Security reviews and compliance assessments
- Automated tools expecting predictable authentication

The codebase has two JWT issuance paths, both validated by ``JwtAuthentication``:

* ``create_jwt_token_dict()`` — wraps a DOT OAuth2 access token into a JWT (DB-backed, revocable, for external clients)
* ``create_jwt_for_user()`` — issues a JWT directly with no OAuth2 flow and no DB row (non-revocable, for internal service communication)

Decision
========

1. **JWT authentication via** ``JwtAuthentication`` **MUST be the standard
   authentication mechanism for all API(external and internal) access**, per `OEP-0042`_
2. **Session authentication MAY be supported alongside** ``JwtAuthentication``

>    on any endpoint — this is the platform default and is acceptable.

Reviewer 3: Could be more clear and definitive about when it should be used? Here is a take on this:
```suggestion
2. **Session authentication must also be used when** the expected client for an API is a Browser/MFE. This would be added alongside ``JwtAuthentication`` on the endpoint — which is the platform default.
```
If I got something wrong, you'll have an idea how to make it more clear.

Author: Your suggestion makes sense.

  (``lms/urls.py``, ``openedx/core/djangoapps/oauth_dispatch``). Settings include
  ``OAUTH2_PROVIDER_APPLICATION_MODEL``, ``OAUTH2_VALIDATOR_CLASS`` (e.g.
  ``EdxOAuth2Validator``). DOT issues JWTs as access tokens via ``create_jwt_token_dict()``.
* **Current API auth**: ``openedx/core/lib/api/view_utils.view_auth_classes``
  configures both **JWT** and **Bearer** (deprecated) and session across 49+ files:

  .. code-block:: python

     # openedx/core/lib/api/view_utils.py (current — violates OEP-0042)
     func_or_class.authentication_classes = (
         JwtAuthentication,
         BearerAuthenticationAllowInactiveUser,  # deprecated per OEP-0042
         SessionAuthenticationAllowInactiveUser
     )

* **Bearer auth**: ``openedx/core/lib/api/authentication.py`` implements
  ``BearerAuthentication`` / ``BearerAuthenticationAllowInactiveUser`` using
  ``oauth2_provider`` (DOT) for access token validation. This is the deprecated path.

Code examples (authentication patterns by use case)
===================================================

* **Example APIs (Keep supporting OAuth2 JWT token & session authentication and deprecate Bearer token)**

.. code-block:: python

>    # lms/djangoapps/course_home_api/dates/views.py — target state (BearerAuth removed as per decision #3)

Reviewer 3: The BearerAuth reference won't make much sense soon. (Same for example below). Recommend that you either include a before and after for `authentication_classes`, or give a permalink like https://github.com/openedx/openedx-platform/blob/c38fb07797f7751b2b20c245fdcffcf995ca4f17/lms/djangoapps/course_home_api/dates/views.py#L68-L74 if someone wanted to know what you were referring to.

   from edx_rest_framework_extensions.auth.jwt.authentication import JwtAuthentication
   from openedx.core.lib.api.authentication import SessionAuthenticationAllowInactiveUser
   from rest_framework.permissions import IsAuthenticated

   class DatesTabView(RetrieveAPIView):
       """Request details for the Dates Tab."""
       authentication_classes = (
           JwtAuthentication,
           SessionAuthenticationAllowInactiveUser,

>        )

Reviewer 3: - Does this doc, or this section, need to address why this isn't just using the default, and what `SessionAuthenticationAllowInactiveUser` is vs. `SessionAuthentication`?
- Do we want to take on stance related to the difference between these two? I believe `JwtAuthentication` has `AllowInactiveUser` built-in, so we're just giving mixed permissions based on which kind of authentication is used. 
  - Brainstorming: 
    - Would it make sense for the default to include `SessionAuthenticationAllowInactiveUser` for consistency?
    - Do we want APIs to have to opt-in (vs opt-out) of blocking Inactive users? If we use a permission, it could be something like `IsActiveUser`. If we want to block authentication altogether, it gets complicated how to do this. We'd need a `JwtAuthenticationActiveUserOnly` or something like that, and linting or other code to ensure that the consistent Session Authentication version is used.

As I said, I'm not sure if you want to address or avoid this discussion in this doc, but using `SessionAuthenticationAllowInactiveUser` in the example doesn't fully avoid or address it.

Author: > If we want to block authentication altogether, it gets complicated how to do this. We'd need a JwtAuthenticationActiveUserOnly or something like that, and linting or other code to ensure that the consistent Session Authentication version is used.

Yes, we have mixed permissions based on authentication classes being used. I think that would be another discussion to have `IsActiveUser `/`JwtAuthenticationActiveUserOnly` or not. 

> Would it make sense for the default to include SessionAuthenticationAllowInactiveUser for consistency?

No, cause we don't want to allow inactive users to sign in everytime.

And as `SessionAuthenticationAllowInactiveUser` is inherited from `SessionAuthentication`(already in defaults) and both are allowed that's why I had not added `SessionAuthentication` in the examples before. And as said [above](https://github.com/openedx/openedx-platform/pull/38301#discussion_r3124436216) we should allow any valid auth or combination of auth classes to facilitate the clients. We can say this ADR will include more of depr/removal work for bearer authentication 😅. 
 
We may be can skip comparison between both types of session authentication classes in this doc & add a Note below examples to use `SessionAuthenticationAllowInactiveUser` or `SessionAuthentication` based on usecase of the API.

Reviewer 3: As I said, this gets complicated. I will address it somewhere else. You are welcome to do whatever you think is best regarding use of `SessionAuthenticationAllowInactiveUser` vs `SessionAuthentication` in this doc.

       permission_classes = (IsAuthenticated,)

> * **Browser-first API (Session primary, JWT added & deprecate Bearer Auth):**

Reviewer 3: I was still getting caught up on `Browser-first API`. Definitely could have been just me. I was getting confused with server-side templates/views. This could just be me, so you don't have to make any changes.

Here is a proposed change:
- API intended for MFE/Browser client

Feel free to adjust or not as you see fit.

Author: Changed, as Browser-first can be confusing for others as well.

  ``openedx/core/lib/api/authentication.py`` are deprecated aliases that exist only
  to avoid breaking external repos — remove once those repos migrate to ``JwtAuthentication``

Rollout Plan
------------

1. Audit existing APIs and categorize — flag any using ``BearerAuthentication`` variants
2. Check active Bearer token usage via the custom monitoring attribute on
   ``BearerAuthentication`` (see ``openedx/core/lib/api/authentication.py`` and
   ``edx_rest_framework_extensions/auth/bearer/authentication.py`` — note both files
   use the same attribute name, so correlate carefully to distinguish which class is active)
3. Update ``view_auth_classes`` decorator to remove ``BearerAuthenticationAllowInactiveUser``
4. Mark ``BearerAuthentication`` / ``BearerAuthenticationAllowInactiveUser`` deprecated in source
5. Remove overdue ``JWT_AUTH_ADD_KID_HEADER`` toggle — make KID header always-on
6. Migrate external clients from Bearer tokens to JWT token flow
7. Remove ``BearerAuthentication`` and its ``OAuth2Authentication`` aliases once migration is complete

References
==========

* `OEP-0042`_ — Open edX Authentication Best Practices (primary reference)

> * `DEPR: BearerAuthentication <https://github.com/openedx/edx-drf-extensions/issues/284>`_ — Deprecation ticket for ``BearerAuthentication`` in edx-drf-extensions and edx-platform

Reviewer 3: Deprecation for BearerAuthentication is simpler than removal, and the DEPR ticket brings up issues and questions around removal that are not addressed by this doc. I'm wondering if you need/want this document to address all the details, or if that should be worked out on the DEPR, and if this doc should simply refer to the DEPR for those details (in the rollout plan)? You are welcome to update the DEPR as-needed, but please don't remove things that aren't clear to you. Thank you.

Author: Questions we had on depr ticket were
1. third-party clients still using Bearer tokens. (this should be done with proper notice/depr_ticket/community_post).
2. how do we handle the 1-hour JWT expiry for long-running jobs. (This should be handled via refresh token).

May be I have missed some,
But I think that discussion should be done on deprecation ticket instead.

Reviewer 3: 1. I added some additional clarity to the section `Possible migration issues` on the DEPR, including moving some notes from the comments to this section.
2. I think using the DEPR ticket itself sounds great. I'd move most of "Rollout Plan" from this doc and update the DEPR as needed, and in this doc's Rollout Plan, I'd have a single line that points to the DEPR for BearerAuthentication deprecation. Otherwise it is unnecessarily split. If there are other rollout plan items independent of deprecation left for this doc, they can remain in this doc. Does that make sense?

Author: yup, this makes sense. We can move whats related to the rollout plan for BearerAuthentication deprecation to the depr ticket to track it there. I'll only mention the depr ticket in this doc.

Author: @robrap I have moved the rollout plan for BearerAuthentication deprecation out of this ADR in this [commit](http://github.com/openedx/openedx-platform/pull/38301/changes/2bcb928b1704db3d53ab482c72af9fdcfb70deb5). You can make changes to the deprecation ticket.

Reviewer 3: Thanks @Faraz32123. Note that the DEPR ticket is in Draft because there was no one to own seeing it through the DEPR process. I drafted it as a place to capture my notes in case anyone were to ever pick it up. From this ADR, it seems there might be some momentum. Feel free to pick-up the ADR (or find someone to do so) and announce it when and if someone is ready to move it forward. The DEPR should first be updated to match the current DEPR template. So, feel free to the update the DEPR as-needed.

That being said - if you or anyone needs someone from the DEPR WG to support you on this process - I'm happy to do so.

Author: > feel free to the update the DEPR as-needed.

@robrap looks like I don't have edit access for the depr ticket.
I had removed some points in this [commit](http://github.com/openedx/openedx-platform/pull/38301/commits/2bcb928b1704db3d53ab482c72af9fdcfb70deb5) that I want to adjust in the depr ticket. Also do we want to update the Depr ticket template as well. 
So should we create a new depr ticket in openedx-platform repo? And close the existing one in favor of new one. Or what do u suggest?

Reviewer 3: @Faraz32123 
1. I'm not sure what to do about the DEPR ticket access issue directly, but maybe @feanil has a suggestion.
2. Feel free to propose any updates here or anywhere, and I can copy them in to the DEPR description.
3. Obviously you should be able to add comments to the DEPR as you wish. It could contain proposed updates, and when we move them to the issue description, you could update your comment as well.
Thoughts?

Reviewer 3: FYI: @Faraz32123: I forgot to add you on the last comment (at first), so adding this to ensure you get notified.

Author: > Obviously you should be able to add comments to the DEPR as you wish. It could contain proposed updates, and when we move them to the issue description, you could update your comment as well. Thoughts?

Thanks @robrap, I'll comment on the ticket.

* ``create_jwt_for_user()`` — issues a JWT directly with no OAuth2 flow and no DB row (non-revocable, for internal service communication)

Decision
========

1. **JWT authentication via** ``JwtAuthentication`` **MUST be the standard
   authentication mechanism for all DRF API endpoints that take user-authenticated
   requests**, per `OEP-0042`_. This excludes admin views, ``/oauth2/access_token/``,
   and HMAC/webhook endpoints, which have their own authentication mechanisms.
2. **Session authentication MUST also be used when** the expected client for an API
   is a Browser/MFE. This would be added alongside ``JwtAuthentication`` on the
   endpoint — which is the platform default.
3. **``BearerAuthentication`` and ``BearerAuthenticationAllowInactiveUser`` are
   deprecated and MUST NOT be used in new code**
4. **``OAuth2Authentication`` and ``OAuth2AuthenticationAllowInactiveUser`` are
   deprecated aliases for** ``BearerAuthentication`` **and MUST NOT be used in new code**
5. **All new APIs MUST follow these authentication patterns based on use case**
6. **Existing APIs MUST be audited and updated to remove** ``BearerAuthentication``

Implementation requirements:

> * All APIs: ``JwtAuthentication`` (+ ``SessionAuthentication`` where appropriate)

Reviewer: What is the reasoning for not allowing SessionAuthentication all the time? I think the implementation requirement should be that unless there is an explicitly need for an exception, all DRF endpoints should use the platform default settings and not explictily override what authentication mechanisms are allowed.  This is usually a platform concern not a per endpoint concern.

Author: Yes, agreed. I'll change the text to reflect what we want.

         JwtAuthentication,
         BearerAuthenticationAllowInactiveUser,  # deprecated per OEP-0042
         SessionAuthenticationAllowInactiveUser
     )

* **Bearer auth**: ``openedx/core/lib/api/authentication.py`` implements
  ``BearerAuthentication`` / ``BearerAuthenticationAllowInactiveUser`` using
  ``oauth2_provider`` (DOT) for access token validation. This is the deprecated path.

Code examples (authentication patterns by use case)
===================================================

* **Standard API (JWT + Session):**

  Example: ``lms/djangoapps/course_home_api/dates/views.py (DatesTabView)``
  (`permalink <https://github.com/openedx/openedx-platform/blob/be3fc121148587fb1da507519534063c89387091/lms/djangoapps/course_home_api/dates/views.py#L68-L72>`_)

.. code-block:: python

   # Current state
   authentication_classes = (
       JwtAuthentication,
       BearerAuthenticationAllowInactiveUser,  # to be removed per Decision #3
       SessionAuthenticationAllowInactiveUser,
   )

   # Target state (after BearerAuth removal)
   authentication_classes = (
       JwtAuthentication,
       SessionAuthenticationAllowInactiveUser,

>    )

Reviewer: I think the target state should be not overriding the platform Defaults set in the settings files.

Author: SessionAuthentication and SessionAuthenticationAllowInactiveUser are different. If an endpoint only need `JwtAuthentication` & `SessionAuthentication`, then there's no need to add authentication_classes in an endpoint. What do u think?

Reviewer: hmm, ok, yes for places that are currently using `SessionAuthenticationAllowInactiveUser` we'll need to leave them as is as that would be a breaking change, we'll need to deal with that later. That's fine.

Standardize Authentication Patterns and Security Schemes

> ========================================================

Reviewer: Other auth ADRs (0003, 0008, 0009, 0010, 0013, 0014) live under `openedx/core/djangoapps/oauth_dispatch/docs/decisions/`. Add a pointer file there linking to this one.

  validated by ``JwtAuthentication``. The deprecated ``BearerAuthentication``
  handles old Bearer tokens and must not be confused with this.
* Security scheme declarations don't match actual authentication behavior
* External integrators cannot reliably predict which authentication method to use
* Internal APIs mix authentication mechanisms without clear patterns

This inconsistency creates confusion for:
- External developers determining which auth method to implement
- Internal teams maintaining consistent authentication patterns
- Security reviews and compliance assessments
- Automated tools expecting predictable authentication

The codebase has two JWT issuance paths, both validated by ``JwtAuthentication``:

* ``create_jwt_token_dict()`` — wraps a DOT OAuth2 access token into a JWT (DB-backed, revocable, for external clients)
* ``create_jwt_for_user()`` — issues a JWT directly with no OAuth2 flow and no DB row (non-revocable, for internal service communication)

Decision
========

1. **JWT authentication via** ``JwtAuthentication`` **MUST be the standard
   authentication mechanism for all API(external and internal) access**, per `OEP-0042`_

> 2. **Session authentication MUST also be used when** the expected client for an API

Reviewer: "For all API access" would include admin views, `/oauth2/access_token/`, and HMAC/webhook endpoints — none of which use `JwtAuthentication`. Narrow this to "DRF API endpoints that take user-authenticated requests" and list the exclusions for context.

Reviewer 3: @feanil: Would another way to say user-authenticated requests be password-authenticated or user-password-authenticated? I wasn't clear at first.

As an aside, for [Mobile Authentication](https://openedx.atlassian.net/wiki/spaces/AC/pages/3351609433/Mobile+authentication+with+JWTs), there were some endpoints that will accept [JwtAuthentication only if it has grant type password](https://github.com/openedx/openedx-platform/blob/14dcc1f83b11f376a32841d50de28c9558e3d650/openedx/core/djangoapps/oauth_dispatch/docs/decisions/0014-add-grant-type-in-jwt-payload.rst).
